---
title  : But Why? Design choices made while creating "Regional population structures at a glance"
author : Jonas Schöley, Ilya Kashnitsky
date   : 2019-02-13
tags   : maps vis R
layout : post
---

*An earlier version of this article has been published in [Schöley, J. &
Kashnitsky, I. But Why? Design choices made while creating "Regional
population structures at a glance". New Generations in Demography,
Oeconomica Publishing House,
2019.](https://oeconomica.vse.cz/wp-content/uploads/page/15835/EBOOK_New-Generations-in-Demography.pdf)*

*Figures in this article can be reproduced using the code available at
[github.com/jschoeley/but\_why](https://github.com/jschoeley/but_why).*

*Many thanks to Ramon Bauer
[@metropop\_eu](https://twitter.com/metropop_eu), Jens von Bergmann
[@vb\_jens](https://twitter.com/vb_jens), Alexandra Lee
[@alextwets](https://twitter.com/alextwets), Jani Miettinen
[@janikmiet](https://twitter.com/janikmiet), and Moritz Stefaner
[@moritz\_stefaner](https://twitter.com/moritz_stefaner) whose great
work is featured in this article.*

In the days following the publication of ["Regional population
structures at a
glance"](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(18)31194-2/fulltext)
(Kashnitsky and Schöley 2018) we were busy participating in the
[discussions](https://www.reddit.com/r/dataisbeautiful/comments/915hxe/oc_regional_population_structures_at_a_glance/)
of our article's main figure (reproduced in Fig. 1) on social media.
Various groups were sharing their thoughts on the colorful map of Europe
showing the population age-structure on a regional level publicly
discussing topics like European immigration, abortion legislation in
Ireland, Italy's low fertility, East-West migration in Germany and more.
Meanwhile designers and visualization researchers debated the question
["clever or too
clever?"](https://twitter.com/moritz_stefaner/status/1022096149673664512).
The hundreds of comments we received post-publication gave us plenty of
opportunity to reflect on our design. In this essay we want to explain
the design choices we made during the creation of the map, explore and
discuss alternative designs and evaluate our visualization against the
goals we had when starting this project. But first let’s take a look at
the map in question:

![](/assets/2019-02-13-but_why/lancet_figure.png)

**Figure 1. Regional deviations from the average European age
structure in 2015 as published in the Lancet letter ["Regional
population structures at a
glance"](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(18)31194-2/fulltext).
Source: Kashnitsky and Schöley (2018)**.

In the year 2015 Europe's population was composed of 16.7% youths (ages
0-14), 65.8% working age (ages 15-64) and 17.4% elderly (65 years and
above). The age structure of any given region however may differ
substantially from the European average. Fig. 1 shows those regional
deviations by the means of a (centered) ternary color scale: Regions
close to the European average show as dark shades of grey, e.g. the
Czech Republic or the south of Spain. The further a regions age
structure deviates from the aggregate age structure, the brighter and
more vivid it is colored with the hue of the color indicating the
direction of deviation: Yellowish regions have a larger share of
elderly, e.g. Eastern Germany or the north of Spain; pinkish regions are
comparatively young and blueish regions have a larger than average share
of working-age population.

Important choices in the design of this visualization were the use of a
ternary color coding scheme, the expression of regional age structure as
a deviation from the European average, the use of continuous colors and
the use of an equal-area map projection (vs. a cartogram). In the
following we will explain these choices and demonstrate alternatives.
The direct quotations spread throughout the text are taken from
discussions of our map on social media.

But why ternary color-coding?
-----------------------------

> *"The design took me a second to get used to but now I’m a fan."*
>
> Simon Kuestenmacher
> [@simongerman600](https://twitter.com/simongerman600), July 24, 2018

> *"Might be a red flag when your legend needs a legend."*
>
> Will Morris [@willmorris](https://twitter.com/willmorris), July 25,
> 2018

Ternary diagrams are not widely used outside the fields of compositional
data analysis, chemistry and geology -- using a color coded ternary
diagram as a legend for a map is mostly unheard of[^1] and makes for a
true [xenograph](https://xeno.graphics/), i.e. a visualization that most
viewers are completely unfamiliar with. So why did we choose such a
weird technique, what did we achieve and what could we have done
instead?

Our design process was informed by two overarching goals and one
technical limitation:

1.  make people understand how European regions differ in their age
    structures,
2.  reach a wide audience, and
3.  do it in a single plot[^2].

*Reach a wide audience:* We knew that we had interesting data in our
hands. Regional age-structures compared to the European average show
very clear spatial patterns and provide a snapshot of the state of the
demographic transition in Europe. The data has the potential to inform
the public debate about population ageing in Europe -- a debate that all
too often simply invokes the image of an ageing continent without
addressing the regional diversity of the demographic transition.

But having interesting data is not enough to catch people‘s attention –
using a novelty viz-technique which shows clear global patterns at first
sight as well as local detail may however successfully engage users
(Hullman, Eytan Adar, and Shah 2011). We had some [prior
experience](https://www.demographic-research.org/volumes/vol36/21/36-21.pdf)
using the ternary color scale (Schöley and Willekens 2017) and found
that it was a technique well suited to get the interest of fellow
academics who, after a short introduction, were able to correctly infer
information from the plot. So yes, we were both aware of the flashiness
of ternary color-coding and capitalized on this very property to arrive
at our secondary design goal. However, we wouldn't have chosen the
ternary color coding technique if we found it to be ineffective at
conveying information.

Make people understand (in a single plot): Upon seeing the [first crude
version](https://ikashnitsky.github.io/2017/colorcoded-map/) of our
ternary color map (a playful experiment at this point) we were amazed by
the sheer number of clearly visible spatial patterns, all of which
related to meaningful differences in the underlying data. This good
result was unexpected. Using color mixtures to represent multivariate
data has experimentally been shown to be ineffective in situations where
it is important to make accurate judgements about the numeric value of
the involved quantities (Wainer and Francolini 1980). The main reason
for that is the inability of people to separate a mixed color into their
primary components, which is compounded by the difficulty of reading
exact values from color encodings of even univariate data (Ware 1988).
Luckily, exact quantitative judgements about the separate parts of the
composition aren't at all necessary in order to achieve our first design
goal, rather, the task of understanding the regional age-structure
patterns is one of *similarity judgements* (which regions look similar,
which look different), *nominal judgements* (does a region have more
old, more young or more working age compared to the average), and
*ordinal judgements* (among two regions, which is further away from the
average), all of which can be performed effectively without requiring
the impossible feat of primary decomposition.

### Similarity judgements

> *"I'm surprised at the drastic difference between neighboring
> countries (e.g. Poland/Germany) I would have expected a more gradual
> transition"*
>
> LockRay July 23, 2018

A basic principle when using color for data visualization is that
similar colors should represent similar data and colors perceived as
dissimilar should represent dissimilar data (e.g. Silva, Santos, and
Madeira 2011). Being guided by this simple rule a reader will be able to
tell that East- and West-Germany feature greater similarities in their
age structure then Turkey and Poland. This is because the color-coding
technique we used assigns colors based on the magnitude and direction of
deviation of a regional age structure from the European average. Regions
which differ from the European average by similar degrees and in similar
parts of the composition will feature similar colors. Ware and Beatty
(1988) found that a multidimensional color encoding allows for such
similarity judgements[^3].

### Nominal judgements

> *"Why is Ireland so young?\[...\]"*
>
> drodrey July 23, 2018

In order to make qualitative statements about a region's age-structure
one simply needs to recognize the meaning of three colors: Yellowish
colors mark a higher share of elderly people compared to the European
average, blueish colors mark regions with a comparatively large share of
working age population and pink regions mark relatively youthful
regions. Reading the plot like this allows to correctly identify
features such as the comparatively high share of working age population
in Poland as opposed to the high share of elderly in Germany. By using
unique and distinct hues for each of the three directions of
compositional deviation from the average we ensured that the
ternary-balance scheme can be understood as a simple categorical color
scale which is known to be an effective encoding for nominal data (e.g.
Ware 2013; Munzner 2015).

### Nominal-Ordinal judgements

> *"I‘m wondering if the old East Germany thing is a side effect of the
> wall coming down."*
>
> PoorEdgarDerby July 23, 2018

The next level of understanding would be to recognize the significance
of chroma and brightness: The closer a regions age structure is to the
European average the darker and grayer it is colored. Using the
chroma/brightness cue one can see that former East Germany deviates more
from the European average than former West Germany and that while both
Ireland and East Turkey have a young population, it is the Turkish
population that deviates further from the European average. Regions in
the Czech Republic and the south of Spain are quite representative of
the European average in terms of their three component age structure.
Burns and Shepp (1988) have shown that brightness and chroma are
effective ordinal encodings even if hue is varying.

### Alternative encodings

> *"\[...\] I'm struggling a bit with the intermediate colors. I would
> have preferred three maps with each of the variables in their own
> monochrome scale."*
>
> Bo Schwartz Madsen [@BoSchwartz](https://twitter.com/BoSchwartz) July
> 25, 2018

How does the ternary color-coded map fair when compared with a more
conventional encoding? We pick up the suggestion above to show the three
components of the composition in separate maps. As we are interested in
deviations from the average European age structure, we use divergent
color scales with a mid-point centered on the European share of the
respective age-group.

![](/assets/2019-02-13-but_why/divergent.png)

**Figure 2. Instead of showing the deviations of a three-part
composition from some average in a single map using the
ternary-balance-scheme one can also show the deviations for each part on
a separate map. This way it's easier to judge patterns relating to any
single part of the composition but arguably harder to make holistic
statements about the three-part composition. Source: Authors; Data:
Eurostat, Population on 1 January 2015 by broad age group, sex and NUTS
3 region (table "demo\_r\_pjanaggr3").**

Sadly, a small-multiples map as shown in Fig. 2 was out of the question
as the publication format limited us to a single figure. A big strength
of the repeated maps is the perfect separability of the three
compositional components. This facilitates analytic judgements about
each of the age-groups in separation from the others. On the other hand,
holistic judgements about the joint three-part composition
(representative/non- representative of European average, type of
deviation from average) may be harder to make because they require the
integration of information from all three maps.

> "Interesting approach with the ternary color scale, but I can't decide
> if 'clever' or 'too clever'. \[...\]"
>
> Moritz Stefaner
> [@moritz\_stefaner](https://twitter.com/moritz_stefaner) July 25, 2018

![](/assets/2019-02-13-but_why/moritz.png)

**Figure 3. (by Moritz Stefaner
[@moritz\_stefaner](https://twitter.com/moritz_stefaner)) The color and
orientation of a line encode the direction of deviation of a region's
age structure from the European average: orange and forward leaning
means more young, purple and backward leaning more old and pink
horizontals represent more people in working ages. Two line symbols may
be combined in a case where two groups have a higher than average
representation. The magnitude of deviation from the average is encoded
via line length and width with longer lines representing larger
deviations.**

Shortly after publication our map caught the interest of German
information visualization designer [Moritz
Stefaner](http://moritz.stefaner.eu/). He initiated a discussion among
viz-professionals and researchers regarding the effectiveness of our
ternary color-coding. A consensus emerged that the color encoding we
used does not allow for accurate numeric estimates of the data at
display. An interesting alternative, using line symbols, is shown in
Fig. 3. The superimposed lines can indeed easily be judged separately
and line length is known to be an accurate visual encoding (Cleveland
and McGill 1986). Crossed lines are but one among many alternative
solutions proposed by famous cartographer (Bertin 2010, first edition
1967) for the problem of mapping multivariate data. Unfortunately, we
did not explore these solutions. It would be interesting to compare the
ternary balance scheme against these alternatives not only with regards
to accuracy but also with regards to the nominal and ordinal judgement
tasks stated above.

But why show deviations from an average?
----------------------------------------

> *"\[...\] Arguably only representing the differences in a trivariate
> rep. obscures the data more by obfuscating the underlying
> data.\[...\]"*
>
> Danielle Szafir [@dalbersszafir](https://twitter.com/dalbersszafir)
> July 26, 2018

![](/assets/2019-02-13-but_why/centering.png)

**Figure 4. Europe's age compositions naturally is highly skewed
towards the broadest age-group 15--65. Due to this narrow clustering
using a regular ternary balance scheme (as seen on the left) makes it
impossible to gain any insight into the regional variability of
population structures. In order to see the internal variation of the
data we shifted the grey-point of the ternary color scheme to the
location of the average European age structure, thereby visualizing
deviations from that average. Source: Authors; Data: Eurostat,
Population on 1 January 2015 by broad age group, sex and NUTS 3 region
(table "demo\_r\_pjanaggr3")**

A central question in data analysis is "compared to what?", e.g. does
Poland have a high life-expectancy (compared to Russia, compared to
other EU members, compared to other former Warsaw-Pact member states,
compared to pre-1990 etc.). Changing the point of reference changes the
question. Some visualization techniques implicitly define the comparison
to take place: In case of the standard ternary balance scheme (Fig. 4
left) lightness and hue encode the magnitude and direction of deviation
from a perfectly balanced composition. The resulting map is of little
help, showing only that the age structure of every European region is
far from balanced and skewed towards the working ages. By moving the
grey-point of the ternary color scale from the location of perfect
balance to the location of the average age structure in Europe in 2015,
we change the comparison and research question to something much more
interesting: How does the age structure of a region deviate from the
European average?[^4]

But why continuous colors?
--------------------------

> *"I have the impression that the 6 discrete color scheme shown on the
> lower legend would have already sufficed, and possibly make the figure
> clearer."*
>
> Selim Onat [@lim\_onat](https://twitter.com/lim_onat) July 25, 2018

Selim Onat had a great idea on how to make the map more approachable:
use only 6 colors. The resulting conventional choropleth map will be
more familiar to the audience with the added advantage that each of the
6 colors represents a distinct and clear situation. Consequence of such
a stark discretization though is a complete loss of subtlety and detail.
Ireland, according to the discrete map, is just as young as Eastern
Anatolia. Of course, other discretization schemes are possible but they
all require a balancing act between clarity and detail. We opted for
maximum detail.

![](/assets/2019-02-13-but_why/discrete.png)

**Figure 5. The six color scheme makes the map easier to understand as
discrete color scales are widely used to encode qualitative information.
The downside of this simplification is the introduction of substantial
quantization bias. Compositional gradients become invisible, the
age-structure of Eastern Anatolia and Ireland become indistinguishable
while similar regions in Germany are assigned highly contrasting colors.
Source: Authors; Data: Eurostat, Population on 1 January 2015 by broad
age group, sex and NUTS 3 region (table
"demo\_r\_pjanaggr3").**

But why no cartogram?
---------------------

> *"Be careful over-interpreting this! Like all data maps, it emphasizes
> large rural provinces and de-emphasizes cities. \[...\] A lot of what
> we're seeing here is differences in urbanism and youth mobility rather
> than age."*
>
> agate\_ July 23, 2018

> *"\[...\] I actually thought that was the most interesting thing about
> the map -- London as a spot of youthfulness in a wider landscape of
> middle aged-to-elderly folk is probably actually a pretty accurate and
> telling feature of the UK \[...\]"*
>
> -burrito- July 23, 2018

Whenever maps depict relative quantities like rates or, in our case,
shares of a whole, information about the size of the affected population
is lost. Instead attention is drawn to large, sparsely populated areas.
This bias is very relevant for maps of the European continent given that
[more than half of the territory of the European Union is
uninhabited](https://dancooksonresearch.carto.com/u/dancookson/viz/49ca276c-adf9-454a-8f64-0ccf0e46eed0/embed_map)
and roughly 3/4 of the EU's population is concentrated in less than 6%
of its area (European Union 2016). In consequence our map of European
age structures over-represents sparse rural populations (e.g. large
parts of Scandinavia) and under-represents the urban majority (e.g.
London, Berlin, Paris etc.) -- this bias can be corrected by using the
cartogram technique.

Population cartograms distort geography in such a way that regions with
equal population counts occupy the same area on a map (Dougenik,
Chrisman, and Niemeyer 1985). Compared to a regular map of Europe a
cartogram pulls attention away from the rural regions towards the
densely populated urban centers as illustrated by the cartogram version
of our age-structure map in Fig. 6: The shrunken regions of Scandinavia,
rural France & Spain and Eastern Europe are balanced by magnified urban
centers such as Paris, Berlin, Rome and Ankara.

![](/assets/2019-02-13-but_why/carto.png)

**Figure 6. Cartograms perturb the physical geography of a place by population size resulting in a map where regions occupy an area proportional to their populous. Notice that on this map Iceland and Scandinavia have largely disappeared while the larger cities are magnified. Note: We used the continuous cartogram algorithm by Dougenik etal. 1985. Source: Authors; Data: Eurostat, Population on 1 January 2015 by broad age group, sex and NUTS 3 region (table "demo_r_pjanaggr3").**

> *"There are places I'll remember // All my life, though some have
> changed"*
>
> The Beatles 1965

Geography is personal. On a world-map we can locate the places we and
our family and friends have lived and worked, the places we have
visited, and places we have heard stories about. This makes statistical
maps a very engaging form of data visualization. Showing regional level
data for a whole continent gives the audience the opportunity to learn
about places they care about -- but only if they can locate them. The
redrawn geography of a cartogram, while being the defining feature, is
also its biggest drawback. With familiar coastlines being distorted and
the space between capitals squashed and stretched orientation on a
cartogram is no easy feat: note the difficulty in recognizing the
outlines of East Germany, Wales or Austria, also, where is London?
Because we wanted the audience to recognize places of interest on the
map we opted against the use of a cartogram. Also, we felt that having
to explain the relatively unfamiliar cartogram technique in addition to
the ternary balance scheme would probably overstretch the audience's
patience.

What worked, what didn't?
-------------------------

> *"I find it amazing that there are such clear differences between
> regions. You could almost take away the national borders and still
> clearly know where they are."*
>
> kenbw2 July 23, 2018

> *"Wow! Heaps of „Elderly“ across Europe!"*
>
> Rene Heim [@ReneHJHeim](https://twitter.com/ReneHJHeim) Jul 24, 2018

We designed the map so that it would reach a wide audience and make them
understand the regional diversity of European age-structures. Did we
succeed? What worked, what did not and what have we learned?

We achieved our goal to reach a wide audience. In addition to the
exposure gained by publishing in a high-impact medical journal our map
of regional age structures in Europe was widely viewed, shared and
discussed on social media. Within one day of publication close to
300,000 people have seen our map on reddit (an online discussion board)
alone leaving hundreds of comments. We achieved similar exposure on
twitter albeit over a longer time period. A few online news outlets
reported on our article. The map inspired others to experiment with the
centered ternary balance scheme, producing maps of [municipal age
structures in
Finland](https://twitter.com/janikmiet/status/1024923420314820609) and
[the
US](https://www.trulia.com/research/where-are-the-oldest-and-youngest-places-in-america/),
[income distribution in Canadian
cities](https://doodles.mountainmath.ca/blog/2018/10/28/understanding-income-distributions-across-geographies-and-time/),
[segregation of Vienna by origin of its
population](https://wien1x1.at/site/wien-zuagraste/) and [forecasted age
structures of US
counties](https://twitter.com/thehauer/status/1044326967858868224) (Fig.
7). We noticed that the map was polarizing. Many people felt engaged by
our visualization and seemed to enjoy the complexity, others were
appalled by the unfamiliar and dense encoding. While we reached a wide
audience, it was also a very select audience of people who enjoy reading
visualizations and are willing to invest some time engaging with them.
Reaching to a more general audience would have possibly required a more
well-known encoding, maybe even a simplification/categorization of the
data.

![](/assets/2019-02-13-but_why/derived_work2.png)

**Figure 7. By publishing all the data and code necessary to reproduce
our map along with an R package implementation of our centered ternary
color scale \[Schöley, 2018a\] we made it easy for others to produce
their own maps. Here are some examples of work inspired by our
publication: A) Adjusted family income distribution in Montréal and
Toronto 2016 (by Jens von Bergmann
[@vb\_jens](https://twitter.com/vb_jens)) B) Municipal age structures in
Finland 2017 (by Jani Miettinen
[@janikmiet](https://twitter.com/janikmiet)); C) County level age
structures in the US 2017 (by Alexandra Lee
[@alextwets](https://twitter.com/alextwets)); D) Population composition
by origin in Vienna 2018 (by Ramon Bauer
[@metropop\_eu](https://twitter.com/metropop_eu)).**

Have people been able to draw correct inferences from the map? Given the
extensive discussions of the map on social media we were able to gain
some anecdotal insight into how well the audience understood the
visualization. Regions of Europe which are qualitatively different in
terms of their age structure were reliably understood: People
consistently pointed to Germany as an "old country"" and to Turkey and
Ireland as "young". The spatial discontinuity in age-composition at the
German-Polish border was pointed out multiple times. Some also correctly
interpreted more subtle differences between regions, such as the younger
age structure of Ireland compared to Northern Ireland and the larger
share of people aged 65+ in the East of Germany compared to the Western
part.

When discussing features of the map people expressed them either in
absolute terms (i.e. region X is very old) or in cross-regional
comparisons (i.e. region X is younger than region Y). Rarely did anyone
mention regional deviations from the European average age composition
which was our intended reading of the map and the color scale. In some
cases, we observed gross misunderstandings such as judging Germany's
population to be mostly elderly, or Ireland's population mostly young.
We believe that the cause for these misinterpretations is not so much
the ternary color coding as it is a design flaw of the legend: The color
scale we used has annotations explaining how ternary diagrams work. What
we should have focused on instead is to explain how our color coding
works. In Fig. 8 we show a re-design of the original legend that
emphasizes the deviation from the European average and explicitly states
how the color scale can be interpreted.

![](/assets/2019-02-13-but_why/legend_redesign2.png)

**Figure 8. While the original legend on the left explains how to read
proportions from a ternary diagram, the redesigned legend on the right
stresses the meaning of the colors and the percent point deviation from
the European average. Source: Authors; Data: Eurostat, Population on 1
January 2015 by broad age group, sex and NUTS 3 region (table
"demo\_r\_pjanaggr3").**

Summary
-------

In summer 2018 we published "Regional population structures at a glance"
\[Kashnitsky and Schöley, 2018\] -- a map showing how regions across
Europe compare against the European average in terms of their population
age structure. We spent half a year designing the map for the purposes
of reaching a wide audience and making them understand regional age
patterns in Europe. Our map was widely shared and discussed on social
media which prompted us to reflect, post-hoc, on our design choices and
their effectiveness with regards to the stated purpose of the map. While
we are more than happy with the impact of our publication and the
discussions of European demographics it sparked (spanning such diverse
topics as Irish abortion legislation, the rural-urban divide, effects of
the German reunification, European immigration policies, Poland's late
second demographic transition, more traditional family structures among
Kurds in Turkey...) reflecting on the feedback we were also able to
identify some problems with our design ultimately stemming from too
little user-testing and an incomplete consideration of alternatives.

For every set of data there are
[countless](https://flowingdata.com/2017/01/24/one-dataset-visualized-25-ways/)
ways to visualize it, some of which are more effective at conveying the
intended message than others.[^5] By trying out different alternatives,
testing them on colleagues, reflecting on the collected feedback and
finally sharing the result of our work alongside our reflections we
would treat the practice of visualizing data just as we treat the
practice of modelling data: as a *design process*.

One last note
-------------

When publishing a map showing European demographics one has to expect
political discussion. We’ve seen people using our map to argue for more
immigration, against immigration, for pro-natalist policies, against
pro-natalist policies and so on... As stated above the map was designed
to be engaging, interesting and consequently to invite discussion. Both
of us gave our best to be available online, mostly on twitter and
reddit, to answer questions, correct misunderstandings and dispel
falsehoods regarding the demographics or the viz. Our most important
task however was to keep the discussion free of hate. There were some
attempts to infuse radical right side ideology into the discussion of
the plot and the data and we saw it as our job to speak out against it.
We believe that it is the responsibility of researchers to participate
in the public discussion of their work. Especially in the age of social
media, especially when the work is of public interest.

References
----------

Bertin, Jaques. 2010. *Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps*.
Redlands, CA: ESRI Press.

Brewer, Cynthia A. 1994. “Color Use Guidelines for Mapping and
Visualization.” In *Visualization in Modern Cartography*, edited by Alan
M. MacEachren and D. R. Fraser Taylor, 123–47. Modern Cartography.
Oxford, UK: Pergamon.

Burns, Barbara, and Bryan E. Shepp. 1988. “Dimensional Interactions and
the Structure of Psychological Space: The Representation of Hue,
Saturation, and Brightness.” *Perception & Psychophysics* 43 (5):
494–507.

Cleveland, William S., and Robert McGill. 1986. “An Experiment in
Graphical Perception.” *International Journal of Man-Machine Studies* 25
(5): 491–500.
doi:[10.1016/S0020-7373(86)80019-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0020-7373(86)80019-0).

Dorling, Daniel. 2012. *The Visualization of Spatial Social Structure*.
Wiley Series in Computational and Quantitative Social Science.
Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Dougenik, James A., Nicholas R. Chrisman, and Duane R. Niemeyer. 1985.
“An Algorithm to Construct Continuous Area Cartograms.” *Professional
Geographer* 37 (1): 75–81.

European Union. 2016. *Urban Europe. Statistics on Cities, Towns and
Suburbs*. Luxembourg: Publications office of the European Union.
doi:[10.2785/91120](https://doi.org/10.2785/91120).

Hullman, Jessica, and Eytan Adar, and Priti Shah. 2011. “Benefitting
Infovis with Visual Difficulties.” *IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics* 17 (12).

Kashnitsky, Ilya, and Jonas Schöley. 2018. “Regional Population
Structures at a Glance.” *The Lancet* 392 (10143). Elsevier: 209–10.
doi:[10.1016/s0140-6736(18)31194-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(18)31194-2).

Munzner, Tamara. 2015. *Visualization Analysis & Design*. 1st ed. Boca
Raton, U.S.A: CRC Press.

Schöley, Jonas, and Frans Willekens. 2017. “Visualizing Compositional
Data on the Lexis Surface.” *Demographic Research* 36 (21): 627–58.
doi:[10.4054/DemRes.2017.36.21](https://doi.org/10.4054/DemRes.2017.36.21).

Silva, Samuel, Beatriz Sousa Santos, and Joaquim Madeira. 2011. “Using
Color in Visualization: A Survey.” *Computers & Graphics* 35: 320–33.
doi:[10.1016/j.cag.2010.11.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cag.2010.11.015).

Wainer, Howard, and Carl M. Francolini. 1980. “An Empirical Inquiry
Concerning Human Understanding of Two-Variable Color Maps.” *The
American Statistician* 34 (2): 81–93.

Ware, Colin. 1988. “Color Sequences for Univariate Maps: Theory,
Experiments and Principles.” *IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications* 8
(5): 41–49. doi:[10.1109/38.7760](https://doi.org/10.1109/38.7760).

———. 2013. *Information Visualization. Perception for Design*. 3rd ed.
Waltham, MA: Elsevier.

Ware, Colin, and John C. Beatty. 1988. “Using Color Dimensions to
Display Data Dimensions.” *Human Factors* 30 (2): 127–42.
doi:[10.1177/001872088803000201](https://doi.org/10.1177/001872088803000201).

[^1]: For earlier examples of such maps see Brewer (1994), Dorling (2012)
(the corresponding PhD thesis was published in 1992), and Schöley and
Willekens (2017).

[^2]: Due to "The Lancet" only allowing a single plot for submitted
letters.

[^3]: They tested whether subjects were able to identify clusters based on
color similarity in a multidimensional data set.

[^4]: We call this technique the "centered ternary balance scheme".

[^5]: In fact the situation is such that the space of possible designs is
massive but contains only few effective solutions (Munzner 2015).
